Update API-onboarding Document to comply with current API Backlog process and Sandbox / Incubated approach (#171)
camaraproject/Governance: documentation/API-onboarding.md

Reviewer: Agree to do this in a PR immediately afterwards.

# API Onboarding and Management in CAMARA

## Introduction

This document describes a clear, consistent, and transparent process for the onboarding (submission), evaluation, and management (maintenance and lifecycle evolution) of API proposals in the CAMARA Project.

The process pipeline is depicted in the figure below.

![API process pipeline](images/API_process_pipeline.png)

All stages within this process pipeline are documented in the CAMARA API overview list. Details and clarifications on these stages are provided in the following sections.

## Submission of an API Proposal

> The pipeline begins with the submission of an API proposal. This proposal can represent a new API or an enhancement to an existing API.

Author: Pending to update onboarding diagram picture

### Steps for Submission

1. **Create a New Issue**  
   - Open a new issue in the [API Backlog repository](https://github.com/camaraproject/APIBacklog) using the designated issue template.

>    - Clearly describe whether it is a new API proposal or an enhancement to an existing API.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Clearly describe whether it is a new API proposal or an enhancement to an existing API. API enhancement requires backlog validation when original scope of the API is to be modified, allowign backlog to analyze posible affectance in other existing APIs.

```

Reviewer: Some typos, beyond that fine for me.

2. **Submit a Pull Request (PR)**  
   - Fill out the appropriate API proposal or enhancement template available in the [API Backlog documentation](https://github.com/camaraproject/APIBacklog/tree/main/documentation).
   - Submit this template via a Pull Request (PR) to the repository folder for API proposals.

>    - Ensure that the PR is linked to the issue created in step 1.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Ensure that the PR is linked to the issue created in step 1.
   
Company responsible for creating the original Issue and PR for a new API proposal is considered as _API Proposal Owner_ during the review process and identified in [CAMARA API overview list](https://github.com/camaraproject/APIBacklog/blob/main/documentation/APIbacklog.md)
```

## Evaluation of API Proposals

After submission, proposals undergo a detailed evaluation process within the "API Backlog" Working Group (WG):

1. **Template Validation**  
   Backlog codeowners verify that all required fields are completed in the template. Missing information shall be provided by the API owner.

2. **Company Support Analysis**  

>    Participating companies review the proposal, analyze its content and additional materials, and decide whether to support it from the backlog proposal stage. Supporters shall commit to providing at least one maintainer if accepted.

Author: Supporters are always welcomed, even in sandbox APIs, so stage is still posible (even f not mandatory for the API to move for approval).

3. **Backlog Review Sessions**  
   During bi-weekly backlog sessions:
   - Backlog codeowners validate that:
     - The proposal adheres to governance and guidelines of CAMARA, including but not limited to the ProjectCharter, the Code of Conduct, the Contribution guidelines, the API Design Guidelines of Commonalities and the Release Process defined in Release Management.

>      - The template is correctly filled out.

Author: ```suggestion

```

   - Participating companies assess:
     - Whether there is overlap with existing APIs.
     - If it is an enhancement or the proposal overlaps with an existin API, approval and validation from affected API groups is required.
   - If no issues arise (*lazy consensus*), the proposal is confirmed as valid for inclusion in the backlog.

4. **TSC Approval and Next Steps**  
   The Technical Steering Committee (TSC) reviews validated proposals during scheduled meetings.
   - Backlog codeowners include agreed proposals in TSC discussion, including target of the API (whether approved APIs will be hosted by a new or existing Sub-Project).
   - TSC confirms that backlog evaluations are complete and correct.
   - TSC approves or rejects proposals based on alignment with project goals and principles.
   
   If approved, onboarding tasks proceed as described below.

## Onboarding Tracker

Once an API proposal is approved by the TSC, onboarding tasks are tracked to ensure smooth implementation. These tasks include:

> 1. **Repository Creation**  

Author: It would be ideal but is pretty difficult the most of the times, conscious that APIs may take a long path until are approved and a proper resource is named in the company. From the past, it's better to wait until resource is needed to name it.

> 1. **Repository Creation**  

Reviewer: ok ... then sometimes repositories will be created without initial codeowner. We already know how to handle that :-)

>    A dedicated repository is created for the API under its assigned Sub-Project or as part of a new Sub-Project. The repository structure shall comply with [CAMARA governance guidelines](https://github.com/camaraproject/Governance/blob/main/ProjectStructureAndRoles.md).

Author: ```suggestion
   A dedicated Sandbox API Repository is created for the API under its assigned Sub Project or as an independent Sandbox API Repository until incubation phase. The repository structure shall comply with [CAMARA governance guidelines](https://github.com/camaraproject/Governance/blob/main/ProjectStructureAndRoles.md) and will be derived from the [Template_API_Repository](https://github.com/camaraproject/Template_API_Repository).
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
   In case of API enhacement proposals, different options are open to be considered:
   - Existing repository and API scope is modified, e.g. including a new API functionality or a new API endpoint.
   - Existing repository is enhanced with a new API.
   - New sandbox repository is created.
```

Author: Maybe then we need to change the name of the stage. _Repository Management_?

- API definitions.
- API documentation.
- Provider implementations.
- Test artifacts.

The Sub-Project will follow the versioning guidelines defined by the Commonalities Working Group to maintain API versions. 

When a new release for an API is accepted by the Sub-Project and merged into the main branch, the [CAMARA API overview list](https://github.com/camaraproject/APIBacklog/blob/main/documentation/APIbacklog.md) will be updated accordingly.

### Documentation in the CAMARA API Overview List

The **CAMARA API Overview List** is a centralized table used to document all API proposals, their progress, and metadata throughout their lifecycle. It provides transparency and traceability for all stakeholders involved in the CAMARA project.

The overview list is structured with the following columns:

| **Column Name**                                | **Description**                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **API [Family] Name**                          | The name of the API or API family (e.g., "Messaging API Family").                                         |

Author: That is a bit generic if the list is "APIs", since API proposals are at API level. I'm ok on living it at public release level (easier to track).

> | **API [Family] Name**                          | The name of the API or API family (e.g., "Messaging API Family").                                         |

Reviewer: See new suggestion to get rid of the "family" term.

> | **Supporters in API Backlog Working Group (*API Owner)** | List of companies supporting the API proposal in the Backlog WG. The API owner is marked with an asterisk (*). |

Author: No, only API proposal owner. Although support should be publicly stated, whether in a live session or in a comment in the PR/Issue

| **API [Family] Proposal Template & Registration Date** | A link to the proposal template filled out during submission and the date it was registered.             |

> | **API Backlog & TSC - Status**                 | Current status of the API in the backlog or TSC decision (e.g., "Approved", "Rejected", or "In Progress").|

Reviewer: Could we extend this field into a lifecycle state, e.g. with the following values:
* Proposal
* ...
* Onboarding
* Sandbox
* Incubated
* Graduated
* Archived

Author: Again, that is related to the repository status not the API itself... We need to align APIs and repositories in this fields.

> | **Sub-Project Link & Active Maintainers**      | A link to the Sub-Project repository where the API is hosted and a list of active maintainers.            |

Reviewer: We need up to three different links here:

a) Link to API Repository
b) Link to Sub Project (within Wiki)
c) List of active maintainers (note: for independent Sandbox repositories this list is preliminary)

Reviewer: We need this change now, as new APIs would get only an API Repository, but are not necessarily part of a Sub Project.

```suggestion
| **API Repository Link & Active Maintainers**      | A link to the API repository where the API is hosted and a list of active maintainers.            |
| **Sub Project link**      |  A link to the Sub Project if the the API Repository is part of a Sub Project. Otherwise "Independent" |     
```

Reviewer 2: typo on the suggested change: 
+ 'A link to the Sub Project if the **the** API Repository is part of a Sub Project'

 to (remove 'the')
-  'A link to the Sub Project if the API Repository is part of a Sub Project'

# API Onboarding and Lifecyle-Management in CAMARA

> ## Introduction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Introduction

_This document reflects current API onboarding process. Updated version including separated API and repository onboarding and lifecycle management will be included soon._

```

![API process pipeline](images/API_process_pipeline.png)

All stages within these processes are documented in the CAMARA API overview list. Details and clarifications on these stages and the management of the API overview list are provided in the following sections.

## API Onboarding

The process pipeline for the submission, evaluation and onboarding of a new API proposal is shown in the figure below:

!! add link to new picture

The process pipeline for the submission, evaluation and onboarding of a new API proposal is shown in the figure below:

!! add link to new picture

The process pipeline for the submission, evaluation and onboarding of a new API proposal is shown in the figure below:

!! add link to new picture

The pipeline begins with the submission of an API proposal. This proposal can represent a new API or an enhancement to an existing API.

### Submission of a new API proposal

To submit a new API proposal any CAMARA contributor can execute the following steps:

1. **Create a New Issue**  
   - Open a new issue in the [API Backlog repository](https://github.com/camaraproject/APIBacklog) using the designated issue template.

>    - Clearly describe whether it is a new API proposal or an enhancement to an existing API. API enhancement requires backlog validation when original scope of the API is to be modified, allowign backlog to analyze posible affectance in other existing APIs.

Reviewer 2: Suggested fixes made:
- “allowign” → ‘allowing’ (typo).
- “possible” → ‘possible’ (typo).
- “affectance” → ‘impact’ (the word affectance is not common in technical English, impact is more appropriate in this context)
- “to be modified” → ‘is modified’ (better grammatical structure for clarity).
```suggestion
   - Clearly describe whether it is a new API proposal or an enhancement to an existing API. API enhancement requires backlog validation when the original scope of the API is modified, allowing the backlog to analyze possible impact on other existing APIs.
```

4. **Development Kickoff**  
   Stakeholders are notified that development can begin, and initial contributions are encouraged.

Progress on these tasks is documented in tracking issues maintained by the API Backlog Working Group.

## Lifecycle Management of API Repositories

All new APIs begin their journey in a *Sandbox* API repository and evolve through defined lifecycle stages: **Sandbox → Incubated → Graduated (→ Archived)**. This progression ensures clarity on maturity levels, development expectations, and implications for deployment and maintenance.

### **1. Sandbox Stage**
The Sandbox stage is the entry point for all new APIs. It is designed for experimentation and early development, allowing contributors to explore ideas without strict requirements.

**Characteristics:**
- APIs in this stage are experimental and may lack full documentation or test coverage.
- Open for contributions from any participant in the CAMARA Project.
- No guarantees of stability or long-term support.

> - Can be initially independant, but should aim to either get accepted by an existing CAMARA Sub Project or to build up the necessary prerequisites to be able to apply for the creation of a new CAMARA Sub Project during Incubation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Can be initially independent, but should aim to either get accepted by an existing CAMARA Sub Project or to build up the necessary prerequisites to be able to apply for the creation of a new CAMARA Sub Project during Incubation.
```

# API Onboarding and Lifecyle-Management in CAMARA

## Introduction

> _This document reflects current API onboarding process. Updated version including separated API and repository onboarding and lifecycle management will be included soon._

Reviewer: Suggest to be a little bit stronger
```suggestion
_EDITORIAL NOTE: This document reflects an interim description of the current API onboarding process. Updated version including separated API and repository onboarding and lifecycle management will be included soon._
```

This document describes clear, consistent, and transparent processes for the submission, evaluation, and onboarding of API proposals, and the management (maintenance and lifecycle evolution) of API Repositories in the CAMARA Project.

> The process pipeline is depicted in the figure below.
> 
> ![API process pipeline](images/API_process_pipeline.png)

Reviewer: I propose to delete these lines and with it the outdated picture even from this interim version of the document.
```suggestion
```

- Test definitions
- API documentation
- Provider implementations (optional, within separate repositories)

The Sub-Project will follow the versioning guidelines defined by the Commonalities Working Group to maintain API versions. 

When a new public release for an API is approved by the Release Management working group and created by the within the API Repository, the [CAMARA API overview list](https://github.com/camaraproject/APIBacklog/blob/main/documentation/APIbacklog.md) will be updated accordingly.

### Documentation in the CAMARA API Overview List

The **CAMARA API Overview List** is a centralized table used to document all API proposals, their progress, and metadata throughout their lifecycle. It provides transparency and traceability for all stakeholders involved in the CAMARA project.

The overview list is structured with the following columns:

| **Column Name**                                | **Description**                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **API [Family] Name**                          | The name of the API or API family (e.g., "Messaging API Family").                                         |

Reviewer: I would like to get rid of the "family" term already here in this version. There is (and was) no such thing as an API "family" in the project Governance. A proposal (and with that an API Repository) is about an API or potentially multiple APIs, which are closely related.

In addition is the should the term "API" or "APIs" never be part of the name.

```suggestion
| **API(s) Name**                          | The name of the API or API(s) (e.g., "Messaging" API(s)).                                         |
```

# API Onboarding and Lifecyle-Management in CAMARA

## Introduction

This document describes clear, consistent, and transparent processes for the submission, evaluation, and onboarding of API proposals, and the management (maintenance and lifecycle evolution) of API Repositories in the CAMARA Project.

The process pipeline is depicted in the figure below.

![API process pipeline](images/API_process_pipeline.png)

All stages within these processes are documented in the CAMARA API overview list. Details and clarifications on these stages and the management of the API overview list are provided in the following sections.

## API Onboarding

The process pipeline for the submission, evaluation and onboarding of a new API proposal is shown in the figure below:

!! add link to new picture

The process pipeline for the submission, evaluation and onboarding of a new API proposal is shown in the figure below:

> !! add link to new picture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> The process pipeline for the submission, evaluation and onboarding of a new API proposal is shown in the figure below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> !! add link to new picture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
